finally we're getting to sub game
perfection
as a motivating example for this video
we're considering the beginning of a
financial crisis where one bank bank a
has suffered large losses
bank a is liable to bank b owes bank b 1
billion us dollars but a total worth of
bank ace assets are only 800 million
dollars
now the typical procedure would be that
bank a declares bankruptcy and then
after
bank a has been liquidated
it repays whatever its assets are worth
to bank b
and the problem is that
bankruptcy is a very costly proceeding
and
it will incur an additional losses of
200 million which means that in the end
bank a can repay bank b only 600 million
dollars
this implies that bank b has an
incentive to bail in bank a
and
renegotiate the debt claim with bank a
and say okay we're willing to accept
the lower payment of 800 million dollars
and this of course prevents bank a from
having to file bankruptcy
now this would be a very efficient
liquidation of bank a and a very
efficient resolution of a financial
crisis
unfortunately this hasn't happened in
the global financial crisis 10 years ago
13 years ago wow it's been so long
the reason why it didn't happen is
because
the government is present
bank b would think well i'm not the only
one interested in saving bank a
now if bank a declares bankruptcy this
will cause large losses to the economy
and the government has an incentive to
prevent that so the government has an
incentive to also rescue bank a
and we can formulate this as a an
extensive form game
where first bank b decides should i
rescue bank a with a bail in
wait in which case it receives 800
million dollars
or should i not bail in
bank a and then the government gets to
decide whether the government should
bail out
bank a or not
if it does not bail out bank 8 and there
will be large losses to the economy
and if it does there will be some
cost of the bailout and this is the
preferred outcome of bank b because its
debtor is protected
now the reason why the government is
modeled second here is because
the government is typically considered
as the lender of last resort and so is
the
the one who steps in at the end if
nobody else has
now we can analyze this game
with nash equilibria we transform the
game into
the reduced strategic form
and we see that
there are
two nash equilibria
um
yeah i'm not sure why i didn't underline
0.8 here
should also be
a so here is the best response
and
there are two pure strategy nash
equilibria
where exactly one of the parties rescues
bank a
and the problem with this is that one of
the equilibria is not
consistent with backward induction
it's the equilibrium in which
bank b
bails in
bank a and the government threatens not
to bail out
um
bank a
problem is that this threat is not
credible
given that the government gets to act
choosing not to bail out bank a is
strictly suboptimal and we wanna we can
rule this out already with backward
induction
now let's change the game a little bit
let's add another creditor of bank a so
there's now two banks that are hurt by
bank a's bankruptcy
and
bank b
can decide to
to enter a bail in and if they enter a
billion bank b and bank c essentially
play a
matching pennies game for who pays for
the bankruptcy so they both flip a penny
if both comes up head then bank c will
pay for it
and
if
both come up tails as well and if they
are different the two pennies then bank
b will pay for it
now as we mentioned here
because we have this launching of an
information set we cannot apply backward
induction
nevertheless we have an idea of what
should happen because we know
that the matching pennies game has a
unique nash equilibrium in which both
players makes 50 50.
so we know that here in this
continuation game
we should expect
a nash equilibrium so we should expect
the 50-50 outcome and then we should be
able to solve the rest of the game
and this is precisely the idea behind
sub-game perfection
now the one additional requirement that
we need is that
we only look at continuation games that
are so called proper sub games and the
sub game is proper if
no information set contains note both
nodes both from the sub game and its
complement now this has two implications
first of all it means that
the beginning of the continuation game
the node x
is a singleton information set
and it also means that
if there is no nodes
within the subgame and outside the
subgame in the same information set then
it means that it is common knowledge
among the players
that they are playing the sub game
and it seems a
useful restriction right if we want if
we predict the behavior
in the subgame
then
it should not rely on anything outside
the subgame
and this is precisely given here by the
condition that it's a proper subgame
then a subgame perfect equilibrium
is a strategy profile such that the
restriction to any proper subgame is a
nash equilibrium
and it turns out that this is precisely
the condition that we need to eliminate
non-credible threats
um
[Music]
if there are non-signaling information
sets
and we see if information is perfect
then any node is in a singleton
information set so then any sub game or
any continuation game is a proper sub
game and in that case we can find the
sub game perfect equilibrium through
backward induction
so indeed subcomperfection is an
extension of backward induction
moreover subgame perfection is a
refinement of nash equilibrium
because the entire game
is a proper sub game
any sub imperfect equilibrium is a nash
equilibrium
and so
subpoena perfection is now the first
time that we see
um
where we see how we use equilibrium
refinements so we say
that in these games that we have looked
at there are too many nash equilibria
there are unreasonable nash equilibria
and we want to
refine this prediction we want to make
the set of predictions smaller by
imposing additional conditions and the
additional condition that we impose is
that
we don't want to have any non-credible
threats those are threats of the
equilibrium path that wouldn't be
carried out
if that information set was reached
now let's go back to this example and
see how we can solve it with sub game
perfection
so
we will see a useful
technique here called the dynamic
programming principle
now if we want to solve this game
then the right hand side is easy to
solve the government prefers to bail out
and in the subgame we've argued that
there is a unique nash equilibrium in
which both makes 50 50.
now
what remains is to
find the optimal response by bank b in
the beginning
and
to do that we can replace
the entire sub game with the expected
utility
that the players receive into
continuation equilibrium so if they mix
50 50 then both
bank c and bank b get 0.8
and
now that we have aggregated the payoffs
it's clear that bank b prefers
not to go into a bail in because
the government will bail out so this is
the expected outcome but now we have a
solution concept
that
gives us the expected outcome
now let's look at a whole different
application
subcamera affection was used to
rationalize the behavior of the united
states and the soviet union during the
cold war in an application called
nuclear returns so the idea is that the
two superpowers are
at well in a cold war with each other
and
if one country commits some provocative
incident
then
the other country can either choose to
ignore it or escalate the incident the
problem is if they ignore it then they
lose a little bit of face because
the other superpower has
successfully committed some provocative
incident
if they choose to escalate it
then
the super power who
committed the productive hint
provocative incident they can either
back down and lose a lot of faith
or they can start a nuclear war
and in the nuclear war the two countries
can either
retreat or attack
and if at least one country attacks
then the utility for all these three
terminal payoffs here will be minus 99
for both country because the attack just
annihilates the entire globe
now
let's see what kind of subgame perfect
equilibria we can find in this game
so
we start at the end of the tree
with this the smallest possible sub game
and we have to find the nash equilibria
so we transform it into a reduced form
strategic game
after we do that
we
get two pure strategy nash equilibria
where both retreat or both attack and it
turns out these are the only nash
equilibria because if
the other if
my opponent retreats with some positive
probability then it's a strict best
response to retreat
so the only possible way how we can have
in a war in equilibrium is if both
attack with probability one
so
now
in this case
there is no unique continuation
equilibrium in this game so what we have
to do is we have to
go through both continuation equilibria
and then see what it implies for the
behavior before the subgame
so let's start with
the
good continuation equilibrium where they
both can't both countries retreat
now
the superpower who committed the
provocative incident
knows that if they start a nuclear war
then they'll both retreat and this is
better than losing so much face
because they both retreat so they both
lost a bit of phase
so in that case it's better to go into
the nuclear war
now anticipating this
the slighted superpower one has an
incentive to not escalate the incident
and just lose a tiny amount of phase
rather than experience all those um
mustering costs that
going into a nuclear war and then
retreating would entail
so this happens
if
the countries believe that
they will retreat if there's a nuclear
war
now what happens if
in the nuclear war actually the two
countries attack
then
well then the continuation
game of the war has such a low
utility so that country two does not
want to go into it and then set back
downs
backs down which means that the
slightest superpower has an incentive to
escalate it
and
i guess this was the outcome
in
the
cuban missile crisis
so how do the two equilibria differ well
interesting is that
the difference between the two is about
the expectation of the countries what
happens if a nuclear war was started
even though the nuclear war is off the
path for
in both equilibria
and
yeah so this illustrates again how
important it is that we require
reasonable off-path beliefs or off-path
behavior because it can affect the
incentives on the path
now what does it mean
if we now look at the cuban missile
crisis it means that it means that they
indeed expected that a nuclear war would
start
if russia doesn't back down and that's
why it was optimal for the us to
escalate it
so let's try to write down a procedure
for finding subgame perfect equilibrium
we go backwards through the tree
and we go through all the sub games
starting with the smallest one then we
look at large and larger sub games
and so
we look at a set of
all nodes for which there is
no
um smaller subgame so we look at maximal
sub games
and
then for all those sub games we
look at all possible continuation
equilibria in those subgames and then
for each one of those we can replace the
terminal node with the expected utility
that the players get in the continuation
equilibrium
then we can transform the pruned version
of this game into its reduced strategic
form find the national equilibrium as we
did in the static games transform it
back to
the
dynamic game find the equivalent
behavior strategies
so overall this could be quite a lot of
work if the game is large
but so in the games that we see
typically in this class there'll be like
one or two steps and it's doable
then
as i've mentioned existence of something
perfect equilibria we'll look at next
week but this week let's look at some
properties of sub-game perfect
equilibria and we'll start with
the following property here that says
when is a nash equilibrium necessarily
sub game perfect
and this is the case if
if anything is
um
on the path
so
on the path a nash equilibrium is
already optimal
and the reason is that there can't be
any non-credible threats as long as the
node is reached with some positive
probability in a nash equilibrium
players have to best respond already
from that node on
and so really sub-complexion is only a
refinement
of behavior of the path
the consequence of this proposition here
is that if we find
a nash equilibrium in completely mixed
strategies
so that those are again mixed strategies
where
every pure strategy is selected with
positive probability or each action is
played with positive probability in that
case everything is on the path and as a
consequence the nash equilibrium is
already subgame perfect
see the proof
because i think it's quite instructive
so
typically we set up the proof by
supposing that the contrary is true so
we look at a
nash equilibrium
on
and we suppose that the restriction to a
subgame that happens with positive
probability
is not a nash equilibrium
right so we look we suppose that there
exists a
profitable deviation in some sub game
that starts at node x
now
what we have to do is we have to show
this to a contradiction and the only
thing we can show it to a contradiction
to is to show that then the nash
equilibrium or then sigma can't have
been a nash equilibrium so what we need
to do is we need to find a profitable
deviation for some player i
how can we find the deviation well we
have a profitable deviation in a sub
game that happens with positive
probability so the idea is that we use
this deviation in the sub game
and we use this strategy
without a deviation in
or outside of the sub game
and this is precisely what we do we
define sigma tilde here to be the
strategy that plays sigma i outside the
sub game and this profitable deviation
in the sub game and the idea is because
the sub game is reached with positive
probability this deviation matters also
in the entire game
so
how do sigma i and sigma tilde i differ
in the distribution
over the game tree
first outside the sub game they agree
because sigma tilde i and sigma i are
the same
this means two things this means that
the sub game is reached with the same
probability because
all the actions leading to x are chosen
with the same probability under both
strategies
and it also means that in terminal node
outside of the sub game is reached with
the same probability because again the
two strategies agree
now
let's show
that
this strategy sigma tilde i here is a
profitable deviation so we look at the
expected utility
now because we only because we can only
make a statement about probabilities
outside the sub-game we condition
whether or not we are in the sub-game
and if it's outside we know
all the utilities are the same
we know the sub game is reached with the
same probability here
the only thing um
that is not the same here is the
expected utility from reaching the sub
gain but here we know that
sigma tilde i
is identical to sigma hat so it leads to
a higher expected utility
and so because the subgame is reached
with positive probability
this improvement here matters and we get
a profitable deviation to sigma i which
is a contradiction to the fact that
sigma was a nash equilibrium
okay
that's it for
the finite
strategy spaces let's look quickly at
what happens if we have a continuum of
actions available
and let's go back to the competition
between our two oil producers but this
time let's look at a stackelberg
competition
where let's say the opec countries
produce first and then the russian
federation observes the amount of oil
that was produced and then they
optimally respond
so that we can compare
the results as easily as possible i
again chose exactly the same
parameterization
now what is different here is that
the second firm now gets to observe the
quantity produced by the first firm and
we can write down an extensive form game
with a continuum of actions using these
these
arcs
but this means here that there's
essentially a continuum of information
sets and for each
quantity observed
firm two can choose a different response
okay we've already seen what the best
response should be by firm two um
if it's an interior point it's 90 minus
q1 over two and if in
if it's the boundary point then it's
zero
now
if
firm anticipates this firm one
anticipates this
then
it will maximize the utility
when we plug in
q2 star here so if we recall in the
corner game
we
had
we first solved for both best response
functions and then looked for a
mutual best response but here it's
different right here first firm two or
first we solve for firm two and then we
plug in the entire best response of firm
two into firm one because this means
firm 1 anticipates the response
all right we plug it in then we use the
fact that
minus the maximum
is the same as
plus the minimum
of
the negative quantity inside
then we can move 90 minus q1 inside the
minimum to both of them
and
then we see that the minimum here
because this is q1 is chosen by firm 1
q1 will never choose something that is
larger than 90. so those two terms will
always be positive and so the minimum
will always be 90 minus q1 over 2.
and this means that
the expected utility
for any quantity q1 given the optimal
response by firm 2 is of this form here
and we differentiated find the
best response
first order necessary condition tells us
that it's 45 and
if we take the second order
derivative then we see that indeed it's
strictly concave
so 45 is indeed the maximum and
firm 2 will then best respond to 45 by
producing 22.5
now
we may wonder
how come that this outcome is different
from the granola competition didn't we
say that
any subgame perfect equilibrium is also
a nash equilibrium
so how could we get
anything other than the corner
equilibrium
if that was the only nash equilibrium
well the important part to note here is
that those are not
the same games because here firm 2 has
many many more information sets right in
the corner competition firm 2 can only
choose one
action has only one information set but
here they have a continuum of
information sets so 45 22.5 is not the
equilibrium it's only the equilibrium
outcome the equilibrium itself is
a decision by firm two for each possible
quantity that can be produced by firm
one
so this will be typical here in these
dynamic games with the continuum of
actions that the best response will be a
function for all possible values that
can be observed
and so it's not correct to say that this
is the sub-game perfect equilibrium but
in fact
this is the subgame perfect equilibrium
and the supreme perfect equilibrium is
unique
a nash equilibrium however is not unique
there are many nash equilibria actually
in the stackelberg game
as an example we can get the corner
equilibrium as a nash equilibrium
if we say that okay firm 2 best response
with 30 no matter
what
no matter what
firm one does
then
this is a nash equilibrium because firm
two best response to firm one right q2
star the best response at 30 is 30.
and given that firm 2 produces 30 firm
1's best response is to produce 30 as
well
the problem is that the threat of always
producing 30 is not credible
firmon knows that if they produce more
firm2 will best respond by producing
less firm2 will not insist on
selling 30 barrels of oil as well
yeah in fact we can sustain any
rational outcome in a nash equilibrium
here because we can
punish off path behavior
so
suppose you want to
support any quantity produced by firm1
then we can do that by saying okay firm2
will best respond on the path
but off the path firm 2 will just flood
the market with oil so that it will
yield to a negative utility for both
firms
well what does this mean well
it means that
firm two best response to firm one by
construction but also firm one then best
response to firm two because deviating
would be extremely costly to both firms
the problem again is that this threat
here of completely flooding the market
is not credible
and
if we insist that there are no
non-credible threats then the unique
equilibrium
is
the subject and perfect equilibrium of
the stockholder competition
another example
of a game with a continuum of actions is
the english auction
and i noticed that if i
play videos
that
that are recorded
then youtube will monetize my my lecture
videos and you'll have to wait through
ads i'm not actually going to play the
video but if you click on it it'll take
you to a
the video on youtube i guess
and yeah for those of you who don't have
time to watch it it's an english auction
in futurama where everybody bids on this
can of old anchovies
and
the
the last two bidding uh last two bids
are 23 million by mom and then fry bids
over her by saying he wants to buy it
for one jillion dollars
and we can phrase this english auction
as a dynamic game
where
the players alternate with bits and they
can choose to either not bid anymore in
which case the other player gets the
item or they can choose to bid
to make a strictly higher bid
and then the utility at the end of the
game is simply the difference between
how much they value
the item minus how much they bid if they
win the auction
now this english auction here has a
problem
it has a problem that
if
mom has
made a bid then because fry has to
choose a
strictly larger bid it means that
the set of possible responses is not
compact anymore and we know that this
can lead to
little problems with existence of best
responses
and this is exactly what we'll see here
so suppose that mom bids some amount
then fry's possible responses are
to either over bid mom or to not bid at
all
so this should be
yeah that's correct
and
well if mom bit higher than the
evaluation than fry's valuation then
then it's no problem because in that
case
fry is happy to not win the auction the
problem is if she bids something smaller
then fry has no best response because no
matter what he bids he would always be
slightly better off by under bidding or
by bidding
over bidding mong by slightly less
so there's no sub game perfect
equilibrium in this game and this should
not come as a surprise because um
yeah because action sets are open after
mom's bid
now next week we'll see existence of
soccer and perfect equilibria in finite
games
and this is one way how we could solve
the english auction we could discretize
the set of all allowable bits
but this is somehow
not a very
not a very clean
way because
depending on how fine we make the grid
the more intractable it will become to
solve the auction what is much cleaner
is that we say okay
we want an auction where
the set of strategies of one player is
not affected by
whatever the other player has chosen
and one way to do it is to consider a
rising clock auction so in the
auctioneer instead of
asking
the bidders to bid themselves up they
could simply have
a bidding curve or a price that goes up
and up and up and
the bidders decide when to drop out of
the auction if the price is too high
and in that case if they both drop out
at the same time then there will be a
lot drawn to designed the winner and in
that case the set of available you know
times to drop out does not depend on
what the others do
so in that case the sub game perfect
equilibrium will exist
lastly
a perhaps surprising something perfect
equilibrium in a
finite extensive form game
you have two subgame perfect equilibria
and
the surprising equilibrium is here the
equilibrium to the left where we see
that
firm 2
all firm 2.
player 2 chooses left
even though given that the information
set is reached
right is strictly dominant
the problem is that
overall this is only choosing right is
only weakly dominant because
if player 1 2 says l then player 2 is
indifferent between left or right so
this is a nash equilibrium
and
in this example here there's only one
proper sub game because subgames cannot
cut through
information sets so
if the entire game is the only sub game
then all nash equilibria are necessarily
sub-game perfect equilibria
and
in
three weeks
we'll see how we can resolve
this issue
yeah the reason why something perfection
can't deal with it is
we can't look at just
the game starting at this note here
or at this note here
because here
um
player 2 knows player 1 chose right
which is information they don't have in
the entire game
so
using the prediction
if player 2 has additional
knowledge
to trying to conclude what happens in
the entire game is not very useful
and
this is not a proper sub game because
player 2 here has less information they
don't know the relative probability
between the two nodes which they do in
the entire game depending on how
frequently player one chooses middle or
right
now so
this may be as a teaser for the future
weeks why does stop imperfect some pecan
perfection not always work and we will
find out why this is the case
yeah
good so we have
finally managed to combine backward
induction with nash equilibria and we
have gotten this very nice solution
concept that is sub-game perfection and
the way it refines nash equilibrium is
that it eliminates non-credible threat
of the equilibrium path
and
yeah
that's
it
um
i forgot to include sort of the most
important concept here and i would say
it's that
players act sequentially rational which
is that they look forward and
take into account what their opponents
will do in the future so the most
important concept here is that we solve
games backwards through the tree
good
some more questions for you to practice
sub game perfection
and
then
actually don't do this one it's maybe a
bit too difficult
um well we'll deal with this next week i
guess
and
the literature here um reinhardt salton
was the one who introduced something
perfection and won a nobel prize for it
good that's it for this video i'll see
you in class